DIY Accounting Paye payroll software using a paye calculator to calculate income tax and national insurance, payroll system prints payslips and produce the paye 2008 revenue forms for a complete paye employers payroll solution for up to 20 employees.

DIY Accounting One Click Payroll is easy-to-use paye employers payroll software, designed specifically for employees who are not contracted out of the state pension scheme with an automated paye calculator to work out income tax and national insurance deductions. The paye calculator is a series of excel formulae built into the payroll system to lookup income tax and national insurance  tables to provide a complete payroll solution. Excel must be installed on your computer to enable the UK payroll system to operate.
    Three versions are available for up to 5, 10 and 20 employees. This UK paye payroll solution automatically produces monthly or weekly payslips for each employee. No entries required, the payslips are produced automatically and printed on ordinary copy paper. No special payroll or payslip stationery is required.
    One Click tax paye employers payroll software automates income tax and national insurance calculations and the pay as you earn administration. Employee names are automatically entered on the weekly or monthly payroll file. When the gross pay is then entered on the payroll file the employee tax code is looked up on the income tax table which is part of the paye calculator and also looks up the income tax code for that employee on the income tax manual tables. The payroll system is linked to the income tax tables and the income tax to be deducted then appears automatically on the payroll. The paye calculator determines from the employee details the correct national insurance table and automatically updates the national insurance deductions and employers national insurance on the payroll system.
    DIY Accounting One Click Payroll software has primarily been designed as a payroll solution that is easy to use requiring the absolute minimum level of entries while automating the maximum level of required payroll functions to save clients time and money. This payroll software in addition to calculating income tax and national insurance contributions also produce excel copies of all the paye revenue returns including the P11, income tax and national insurance deductions record, the P14 which is the year summary of the income tax and national insurance deductions. Excel copies of the P45 tax form are automated and at the financial year end the system produces the P60 end of year Paye summary. A complete payroll and paye administration package.
    **Key Features & Benefits DIY Accounting Self employed and Company Paye 2008 Payroll Software**
    1. This tax paye payroll solution is fast and easy to use requiring employee details and gross pay only to be entered on the payroll sheets, all other functions and forms to be filled in have been automated to provide a complete payroll solution.
    2. One Click Payroll because when the employees and gross pay is the same as the previous pay period you can simply enter "Y" in the appropriate box and all payroll details will be repeated for that pay period, payslips produced and all income tax, national insurance revenue forms updated
    3. UK payroll solutions for up to 20 employees. Year to date figures are automatically updated.
    4. Payslips automatically generated ready for printing on plain paper with no requirement for expensive specialised documentation.
    5. One Click Payroll User Guide explains the payroll system with easy to read notes to lead you through the package
    6. Annual Employers Return forms part of the paye administration and shows the employees’ names, income tax and national insurance contributions all produced automatically.
    7. The company paye payroll software can be integrated into the self employed accounts or company accounts package by simply saving the payroll files to the same folder as the accounting spreadsheets
    8. Technical and Operational support is included by phone or online via email with payroll questions dealt with the same day.
    9. For further information please visit: Payroll Software which has paye 2008 and previous years solutions