Affiliate programs offer an excellent opportunity to make money online with two tier affiliate programs potentially the most lucrative of all providing a viral network for the affiliate marketing program and affiliates the benefit of substantial residual earnings. A two tier affiliate program pays commission to affiliates at two levels, on sales generated from your own website link plus a percentage of the commission earned by other affiliates introduced to the affiliate program through your link.
    **The Hype**
    Join a Two Tier Affiliate Program and become Super Rich in the virtual world virtually overnight simply by placing a link on your website then sit back and watch enormous lumps of money swell your own private cash pile growing by the hour. Amazing! Fantastic! New car, new home, extended holidays, all while you relax by the pool and your affiliate program link delivers you super rich status! It is that easy!
     *Welcome to the real world!!*
    Fact a two tier affiliate program has the absolute potential to make you serious amounts of money. It won’t happen overnight; it will require dedication, persistence and a completely focused work ethic targeted at building your affiliate program business. You can do it from home; you can do it part time.
    But can it happen? - Most definitely YES! Your financial dreams really can come true with a two tier affiliate program.
    It will require work, you can make money with Affiliate Program and the harder you work the more you will make. Sit back and do nothing and that’s what you will make – Nothing!
    **Join a Two Tier Affiliate Program**
    Look for a two tier affiliate program that pays a good tier one commission and most important an excellent tier two commission. Level one commission are the rewards for your efforts. Level two commissions are crucial to building your residual income. A 50% level two commission only requires two affiliates to join your affiliate program to double your income if you encourage your affiliates to work at your level. When you join a Two Tier Affiliate Program you are running your own affiliate marketing program. Join a free affiliate program.
    **Affiliate Program Content**
    Placing a link on your website while essential is not nearly enough. Add real content, quality content either provided by the affiliate program website or search the internet, article sites being an exceptional resource. Add high quality content to your affiliate program website. In addition to directly relevant content and a link to the affiliate program website add a second link direct to that affiliate program website sign up page. Focus the content to encourage visitors to click through to the affiliate program. Stimulate visitor interest, pose the question and provide the answer in a link through to the affiliate program website. The Affiliate Program website is where you earn your commission and where you want the visitor to go.
    **Optimise Affiliate Program Content Page**
    Use Meta tags to optimise the affiliate program page for search engines:
    <title>Content Specific maximum 80 characters, preferably 70</title>
    <meta name="description" content="Use your keywords to write description and keep below 250 characters, preferably 150">
    <meta name="Keywords" content="Choose 5 - 10 keywords that will get your site on the first 10 organic search pages">
    <meta name="Robots" content="All">
    Meta tags can be checked and improved at www.submitexpress.co.uk for free
    Choosing the highest volume search terms is tremendously beneficial if your affiliate program content page has a high page rank. Be realistic, if your affiliate program page has a lower page rank choose less popular keywords to increase your chance of being searched. Use a free optimisation site to ensure title; description; keywords and relevancy score 100%. After optimisation submit the affiliate program webpage with the two tier affiliate program links using a free submission service to get the affiliate program page indexed and listed.
    If your website as a site map add the affiliate program page to that map for indexing
    **Link Popularity Drives Traffic**
    List the affiliate program content page on suitable directories, hundreds of links back to this page will drive traffic and improve the page rank.
    Write articles relevant to the affiliate program content and post these through the internet. Consider an article submitter to automate part of this process, avoid spamming the article sites. Writing good quality articles will increase link popularity and drive even more traffic to your content page. Get articles from the Two Tier Affiliate Program website.
    Approach and write articles for ezines and newsletters relative to content or your two tier affiliate program.
    Conduct searches using main industry keywords to find similar content websites and invite non competitive sites to join your two tier affiliate program.
    **Set and Achieve Targets**
    Set targets for sales and affiliate recruitment, work at page content and popularity links to drive traffic to achieve the targets. It helps if your affiliate marketing program is a free affiliate program. A free affiliate program is one less barrier to joining your affiliate program.
    Be persistent and determined. Achieve the goals of your very own affiliate marketing program. The cash will follow. Remember Lady Luck? Lady Luck is proportionate to the number of chances you make for yourself. Give yourself enough chances and Lady Luck will smile in your direction. ***Good Luck!***